Optimization + Sreams document (#35)
kube-rs/website: docs/controllers/optimization.md

# Optimization

This document aims to help optimize various factors of resource consumption by controllers, and it will effectively be a guide on how to reduce the usage of your [watcher] streams to simplify things for downstream consumers.

## Watcher Streams in Controllers

By **default**, [watcher] streams are **implicitly configured** within the [Controller], but using the controller streams interface setup introduced in [kube 0.81](https://github.com/kube-rs/kube/releases/tag/0.81.0) you can **explicitly setup** all the [watcher] stream for more precise targeting:

```rust
let cfg = watcher::Config { RESTRICTIONS };
let stream = reflector(writer, SOME_WATCHER(cfg))
Controller::for_stream(stream, reader);
```

As this document will show, there are various ways to put restrictions on your watcher (and there are also two main types of watchers), but the central premise herein is that **controllers benefit from customizing the input stream** and we will show how to do these configurations.

!!! warning "The controller streams interface is unstable"

>     Currently plugging streams into [Controller] requires the `kube/unstable-runtime` feature. This feature requirement will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Currently plugging streams into [Controller] requires the `kube/unstable-runtime` feature. This interface is planned to be stabilized in a future release.
```

The controller streams interface is comprised of [Controller::for_stream], and [Controller::watches_stream] and [Controller::owns_stream], which are stream input analogues for the commonly advertised `Controller::new`, `Controller::watches`, and `Controller::owns` (respectively) interfaces.

## Watcher Optimization

One of the biggest contributor to activity in a [Controller] is the constant, long-polling watch of the [[object]] and every related object by the use of multiple [watcher] streams.

By themselves, the optimizations listed herein for watchers are generally for reducing IO or networked traffic. However, when used in combination with [reflector] caches they also become memory optimizations.

### Reducing Number of Watched Objects
The default `watcher::Config` will watch every object in the [Api] scope you configured:

- `Api::namespaced` or `Api::default_namespaced` -> all objects in that namespace
- `Api::all` -> all cluster scoped objects (or all objects in all namespaces)

> This can be limited to just a subset of namespaces, or a subset of objects using field selectors to limit to a selection of known names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be limited to just a subset of namespaces, or other properties on the objects. For example, field selectors can be used to limit to a selection of known names:
```

```rust
let cfg = watcher::Config::default().fields(&format!("metadata.name={name}"));
```

> This can also be comma-delimited for more names, and similarly you you can also comma deliminate an exclusion list on names or namespaces:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be comma-delimited for more names, and similarly you you can also comma deliminate an exclusion list on names or namespaces:
```

Small thing: when reading I tripped over the double `also`

If you find that field-selectors are too constrictive for your set of objects, the problem can generally be solved using by [explicitly labelling](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/) the objects you care about and use label selectors instead:

```rust
let cfg = Config::default().labels("environment in (production, qa)");
```

### Watching Metadata Only

Generally, **Kubernetes will return all fields** for an object when doing a watch, so while the main tool at our disposal to reduce networked traffic is to reduce the number of watched objects, there is one trick available:

We can ask Kubernetes to only return [TypeMeta] (`.api_version` + `.kind`) + [ObjectMeta] (`.metadata`) in our watches and list calls using `Api::watch_metadata` or the stream analogue [metadata_watcher]; a drop-in replacement for [watcher]:

```rust
let cfg = watcher::Config::default().fields(&ignoring_system_namespaces);
let stream = reflector(writer, metadata_watcher(api, cfg)).applied_objects();
```

While this will not work in all cases (if you need more data than metadata), it is a big improvement when it is feasible.

> Given metadata is generally only responsible from a **fraction of the data** in dense objects - and generally receives even 2x benefits for more sparse objects (see also [[#pruning-fields]]) - swapping to metadata_watchers can **significantly reduce reflector sizes** (memory footprint).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that metadata is generally only responsible for a **fraction of the data** in dense objects - and generally receives even 2x benefits for more sparse objects (see also [[#pruning-fields]]) - swapping to metadata_watchers can **significantly reduce reflector sizes** (memory footprint).
```

Reviewer: Probably also worth adding a note here about that this is primarily helpful when only the metadata is required (especially for watching owned objects and such?)..

If the first thing your reconciler does is `api.get()` then this would be less helpful.

Author: Yeah, I can see if there are some wording that can include that (merged the minor suggestion above). There are some legit cases for controllers from metadata watchers (not using owned/watched streams), but from my experience they are primarily label/annotation assigners.

If the reconciler calls `api.get()` - something people traditionally do for consistency - then you could probably still make the case that metadata watchers are helpful; you can run the watcher with `Any` semantic (because you are forcing an up-date anyway), and you also can do filtering of the watcher stream early so you only do full object fetches in the reconciler.

> Given metadata is generally only responsible from a **fraction of the data** in dense objects - and generally receives even 2x benefits for more sparse objects (see also [[#pruning-fields]]) - swapping to metadata_watchers can **significantly reduce reflector sizes** (memory footprint).

Author: got out-dated, incorported into https://github.com/kube-rs/website/pull/35/commits/6d6127cd9c510516bc43a7044f8f73b513be13fd

TODO: panel snapshot.

> This is also a networked simplification and will also **reduce the amount of networked traffic** the controller is responsible for by commensurate amounts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a networked simplification and will also **reduce the amount of networked traffic** the controller is responsible for by commensurate amounts.
```

Same thing here with the double also

TODO: panel snapshot.

### Avoid the List Spike

At time of writing, every permanent watch loop setup against kube-apiserver requires a `list` call (to initialise) followed by a long `watch` call starting at the given `resourceVersion` from `list`. De-syncs could happen, and these would force a re-list to re-initialize (forcing a slew of old objects to be passed through controllers again).

This `list` call has **no enforced limits** on how many objects can be requested in one go and has caused kube to run without limits up until recently. This `list` call has been [showed to cause both IO and memory spikes](https://github.com/kube-rs/kube/issues/1209) and requires a future opt-in in in 0.84 via https://github.com/kube-rs/kube/pull/1211 to watcher configs:

```rust
let cfg = watcher::Config::default().page_size_limit(50);

> ```

Reviewer: The wording here feels a bit awkward, but I don't have a concrete rewording right now.. :/

Author: Agreed, this one was more roughly written than the rest. Have made a smaller change for it in https://github.com/kube-rs/website/pull/35/commits/6d6127cd9c510516bc43a7044f8f73b513be13fd + fixing some obvious typos after.

Feel free to propose other suggestions though!

```rust
let deploys: Api<Deployment> = Api::default_namespaced(client);
let changed_deploys = watcher(deploys, watcher::Config::default())
    .applied_objects()
    .predicate_filter(predicates::generation);
```

!!! warning "Predicates are unstable"

    Predicates are a new feature in some flux with the last change in 0.84. They require one of the `unstable-runtime` feature flags.

## Impossible Optimizations

We leave a list of **currently impossible** (or technically infeasible) controller optimisation problems here and link to issues for transparency and in the hope that they will be tackled in the future.

- [Sharing streams between **multiple controllers**](https://github.com/kube-rs/kube/issues/1080) (can only configure so far)
- [Waiting for a store to be ready](https://github.com/kube-rs/kube/issues/1226)

## Summary

As a short summary, here are the main listed optimization and the effect you should expect to see from utilising them.

| Optimization Type  | Target Reduction   |
| ------------------ | ------------------ |
| metadata_watcher   | IO + Memory        |
| watcher selectors  | IO + Memory        |

> | watcher page size  | IO + Memory Spike  |

Reviewer: Pagination is actually a tradeoff between IO and memory spikes, generally smaller pages mean lower memory usage but more IO.

Author: When you say IO tradeoff, are you referring to the IO overhead of having extra requests carry out the pagination? Isn't that just a few sets of request headers? I can include that if you think it's significant, but afaikt the actual data on the wire (which i feel is a "most of it") should be roughly the same :thinking:

Reviewer: In terms of data, the overhead should be relatively small, yes (assuming that you're not doing something silly like `page_size(1)` for a metadata watcher). But there's also latency (fixed per-request overhead for things like authn/-z validation) and another synchronization point where the server must wait for the client to catch up (including confirmation!) before data streaming can continue. And in the worst case, each request could even mean doing a full TCP slow start and TLS handshake.

What it definitely won't do is reduce the amount of IO overhead.

Author: Ah, I see. Yes, it's probably wrong to highlight IO in the summary table. I was trying to highlight that it "spreads out the IO over time", making it less spiky, but that's not really important compared to the memory benefit.

Have reworded the table and changed up some page size paragraphs some more in https://github.com/kube-rs/website/pull/35/commits/d0bc8b9a9765796312d3cdc4ba07c73cbf05a0c6 to highlight it (but have avoided going into latency and IO here since it feels like the smaller problem to me).
